README.md, before:

# Fantasy Land Specification

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/fantasyland/fantasy-land.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/fantasyland/fantasy-land) [![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/fantasyland/fantasy-land](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/fantasyland/fantasy-land?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

(aka "Algebraic JavaScript Specification")

<img src="logo.png" width="200" height="200" />

This project specifies interoperability of common algebraic
structures:

* [Setoid](#setoid)
* [Semigroup](#semigroup)
* [Monoid](#monoid)
* [Functor](#functor)
* [Apply](#apply)
* [Applicative](#applicative)
* [Alt](#alt)
* [Plus](#plus)
* [Alternative](#alternative)
* [Foldable](#foldable)
* [Traversable](#traversable)
* [Chain](#chain)
* [ChainRec](#chainrec)
* [Monad](#monad)
* [Extend](#extend)
* [Comonad](#comonad)
* [Bifunctor](#bifunctor)
* [Profunctor](#profunctor)

<img src="figures/dependencies.png" width="888" height="347" />

## General

An algebra is a set of values, a set of operators that it is closed
under and some laws it must obey.

Each Fantasy Land algebra is a separate specification. An algebra may
have dependencies on other algebras which must be implemented.

## Terminology

1. "value" is any JavaScript value, including any which have the
   structures defined below.
2. "equivalent" is an appropriate definition of equivalence for the given value.
    The definition should ensure that the two values can be safely swapped out in a program that respects abstractions. For example:
    - Two lists are equivalent if they are equivalent at all indices.
    - Two plain old JavaScript objects, interpreted as dictionaries, are equivalent when they are equivalent for all keys.
    - Two promises are equivalent when they yield equivalent values.
    - Two functions are equivalent if they yield equivalent outputs for equivalent inputs.

## Prefixed method names

In order for a data type to be compatible with Fantasy Land, its values must
have certain properties. These properties are all prefixed by `fantasy-land/`.
For example:

```js
//  MyType#fantasy-land/map :: MyType a ~> (a -> b) -> MyType b
MyType.prototype['fantasy-land/map'] = ...
```

Further in this document unprefixed names are used just to reduce noise.

For convenience you can use `fantasy-land` package:

```js
var fl = require('fantasy-land')

// ...

MyType.prototype[fl.map] = ...

// ...

var foo = bar[fl.map](x => x + 1)
```

## Type representatives

Certain behaviours are defined from the perspective of a member of a type.
Other behaviours do not require a member. Thus certain algebras require a
type to provide a value-level representative (with certain properties). The
Identity type, for example, could provide `Id` as its type representative:
`Id :: TypeRep Identity`.

If a type provides a type representative, each member of the type must have
a `constructor` property which is a reference to the type representative.

## Algebras

### Setoid

1. `a.equals(a) === true` (reflexivity)
2. `a.equals(b) === b.equals(a)` (symmetry)
3. If `a.equals(b)` and `b.equals(c)`, then `a.equals(c)` (transitivity)

#### `equals` method

```hs
equals :: Setoid a => a ~> a -> Boolean
```

A value which has a Setoid must provide an `equals` method. The
`equals` method takes one argument:

    a.equals(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Setoid

    1. If `b` is not the same Setoid, behaviour of `equals` is
       unspecified (returning `false` is recommended).

2. `equals` must return a boolean (`true` or `false`).

### Semigroup

1. `a.concat(b).concat(c)` is equivalent to `a.concat(b.concat(c))` (associativity)

#### `concat` method

```hs
concat :: Semigroup a => a ~> a -> a
```

A value which has a Semigroup must provide a `concat` method. The
`concat` method takes one argument:

    s.concat(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Semigroup

    1. If `b` is not the same semigroup, behaviour of `concat` is
       unspecified.

2. `concat` must return a value of the same Semigroup.

### Monoid

A value that implements the Monoid specification must also implement
the [Semigroup](#semigroup) specification.

1. `m.concat(M.empty())` is equivalent to `m` (right identity)
2. `M.empty().concat(m)` is equivalent to `m` (left identity)

#### `empty` method

```hs
empty :: Monoid m => () -> m
```

A value which has a Monoid must provide an `empty` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives):

    M.empty()

Given a value `m`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    m.constructor.empty()

1. `empty` must return a value of the same Monoid

### Functor

1. `u.map(a => a)` is equivalent to `u` (identity)
2. `u.map(x => f(g(x)))` is equivalent to `u.map(g).map(f)` (composition)

#### `map` method

```hs
map :: Functor f => f a ~> (a -> b) -> f b
```

A value which has a Functor must provide a `map` method. The `map`
method takes one argument:

    u.map(f)

1. `f` must be a function,

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `map` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `map` must return a value of the same Functor

### Apply

A value that implements the Apply specification must also
implement the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `v.ap(u.ap(a.map(f => g => x => f(g(x)))))` is equivalent to `v.ap(u).ap(a)` (composition)

#### `ap` method

```hs
ap :: Apply f => f a ~> f (a -> b) -> f b
```

A value which has an Apply must provide an `ap` method. The `ap`
method takes one argument:

    a.ap(b)

1. `b` must be an Apply of a function,

    1. If `b` does not represent a function, the behaviour of `ap` is
       unspecified.

2. `a` must be an Apply of any value

3. `ap` must apply the function in Apply `b` to the value in
   Apply `a`

   1. No parts of return value of that function should be checked.

### Applicative

A value that implements the Applicative specification must also
implement the [Apply](#apply) specification.

1. `v.ap(A.of(x => x))` is equivalent to `v` (identity)
2. `A.of(x).ap(A.of(f))` is equivalent to `A.of(f(x))` (homomorphism)
3. `A.of(y).ap(u)` is equivalent to `u.ap(A.of(f => f(y)))` (interchange)

#### `of` method

```hs
of :: Applicative f => a -> f a
```

A value which has an Applicative must provide an `of` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives). The `of` function takes
one argument:

    F.of(a)

Given a value `f`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    f.constructor.of(a)

1. `of` must provide a value of the same Applicative

    1. No parts of `a` should be checked

### Alt

A value that implements the Alt specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `a.alt(b).alt(c)` is equivalent to `a.alt(b.alt(c))` (associativity)
2. `a.alt(b).map(f)` is equivalent to `a.map(f).alt(b.map(f))` (distributivity)

#### `alt` method

```hs
alt :: Alt f => f a ~> f a -> f a
```

A value which has a Alt must provide a `alt` method. The
`alt` method takes one argument:

    a.alt(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Alt

    1. If `b` is not the same Alt, behaviour of `alt` is
       unspecified.
    2. `a` and `b` can contain any value of same type.
    3. No parts of `a`'s and `b`'s containing value should be checked.

2. `alt` must return a value of the same Alt.

### Plus

A value that implements the Plus specification must also implement
the [Alt](#alt) specification.

1. `x.alt(A.zero())` is equivalent to `x` (right identity)
2. `A.zero().alt(x)` is equivalent to `x` (left identity)
2. `A.zero().map(f)` is equivalent to `A.zero()` (annihilation)

#### `zero` method

```hs
zero :: Plus f => () -> f a
```

A value which has a Plus must provide an `zero` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives):

    A.zero()

Given a value `x`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    x.constructor.zero()

1. `zero` must return a value of the same Plus

### Alternative

A value that implements the Alternative specification must also implement
the [Applicative](#applicative) and [Plus](#plus) specifications.

1. `x.ap(f.alt(g))` is equivalent to `x.ap(f).alt(x.ap(g))` (distributivity)
1. `x.ap(A.zero())` is equivalent to `A.zero()` (annihilation)

### Foldable

1. `u.reduce` is equivalent to `u.reduce((acc, x) => acc.concat([x]), []).reduce`

#### `reduce` method

```hs
reduce :: Foldable f => f a ~> ((b, a) -> b, b) -> b
```

A value which has a Foldable must provide a `reduce` method. The `reduce`
method takes two arguments:

    u.reduce(f, x)

1. `f` must be a binary function

    1. if `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `reduce` is unspecified.
    2. The first argument to `f` must be the same type as `x`.
    3. `f` must return a value of the same type as `x`.
    4. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

1. `x` is the initial accumulator value for the reduction

    1. No parts of `x` should be checked.

### Traversable

A value that implements the Traversable specification must also
implement the [Functor](#functor) and [Foldable](#foldable) specifications.

1. `t(u.traverse(x => x, F.of))` is equivalent to `u.traverse(t, G.of)`
for any `t` such that `t(a).map(f)` is equivalent to `t(a.map(f))` (naturality)

2. `u.traverse(F.of, F.of)` is equivalent to `F.of(u)` for any Applicative `F` (identity)

3. `u.traverse(x => new Compose(x), Compose.of)` is equivalent to
   `new Compose(u.traverse(x => x, F.of).map(x => x.traverse(x => x, G.of)))` for `Compose` defined below and any Applicatives `F` and `G` (composition)

```js
var Compose = function(c) {
  this.c = c;
};

Compose.of = function(x) {
  return new Compose(F.of(G.of(x)));
};

Compose.prototype.ap = function(f) {
  return new Compose(this.c.ap(f.c.map(u => y => y.ap(u))));
};

Compose.prototype.map = function(f) {
  return new Compose(this.c.map(y => y.map(f)));
};
```

#### `traverse` method

```hs
traverse :: Applicative f, Traversable t => t a ~> (a -> f b, c -> f c) -> f (t b)
```

A value which has a Traversable must provide a `traverse` method. The `traverse`
method takes two arguments:

    u.traverse(f, of)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `traverse` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of an Applicative

2. `of` must be the `of` method of the Applicative that `f` returns
3. `traverse` must return a value of the same Applicative that `f` returns

### Chain

A value that implements the Chain specification must also
implement the [Apply](#apply) specification.

1. `m.chain(f).chain(g)` is equivalent to `m.chain(x => f(x).chain(g))` (associativity)

#### `chain` method

```hs
chain :: Chain m => m a ~> (a -> m b) -> m b
```

A value which has a Chain must provide a `chain` method. The `chain`
method takes one argument:

    m.chain(f)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `chain` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of the same Chain

2. `chain` must return a value of the same Chain

### ChainRec

A value that implements the ChainRec specification must also implement the [Chain](#chain) specification.

1. `M.chainRec((next, done, v) => p(v) ? d(v).map(done) : n(v).map(next), i)`
   is equivalent to
   `(function step(v) { return p(v) ? d(v) : n(v).chain(step); }(i))` (equivalence)
2. Stack usage of `M.chainRec(f, i)` must be at most a constant multiple of the stack usage of `f` itself.

#### `chainRec` method

```hs
chainRec :: ChainRec m => ((a -> c, b -> c, a) -> m c, a) -> m b
```

A Type which has a ChainRec must provide a `chainRec` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives). The `chainRec` function
takes two arguments:

    M.chainRec(f, i)

Given a value `m`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    m.constructor.chainRec(f, i)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value
    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `chainRec` is unspecified.
    2. `f` takes three arguments `next`, `done`, `value`
        1. `next` is a function which takes one argument of same type as `i` and can return any value
        2. `done` is a function which takes one argument and returns the same type as the return value of `next`
        3. `value` is some value of the same type as `i`
    3. `f` must return a value of the same ChainRec which contains a value returned from either `done` or `next`
2. `chainRec` must return a value of the same ChainRec which contains a value of same type as argument of `done`

### Monad

A value that implements the Monad specification must also implement
the [Applicative](#applicative) and [Chain](#chain) specifications.

1. `M.of(a).chain(f)` is equivalent to `f(a)` (left identity)
2. `m.chain(M.of)` is equivalent to `m` (right identity)

### Extend

A value that implements the Extend specification must also implement the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `w.extend(g).extend(f)` is equivalent to `w.extend(_w => f(_w.extend(g)))`

#### `extend` method

```hs
extend :: Extend w => w a ~> (w a -> b) -> w b
```

An Extend must provide an `extend` method. The `extend`
method takes one argument:

     w.extend(f)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `extend` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of type `v`, for some variable `v` contained in `w`.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `extend` must return a value of the same Extend.

### Comonad

A value that implements the Comonad specification must also implement the [Extend](#extend) specification.

1. `w.extend(_w => _w.extract())` is equivalent to `w`
2. `w.extend(f).extract()` is equivalent to `f(w)`

#### `extract` method

```hs
extract :: Comonad w => w a ~> () -> a
```

A value which has a Comonad must provide an `extract` method on itself.
The `extract` method takes no arguments:

    c.extract()

1. `extract` must return a value of type `v`, for some variable `v` contained in `w`.
    1. `v` must have the same type that `f` returns in `extend`.

### Bifunctor

A value that implements the Bifunctor specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `p.bimap(a => a, b => b)` is equivalent to `p` (identity)
2. `p.bimap(a => f(g(a)), b => h(i(b))` is equivalent to `p.bimap(g, i).bimap(f, h)` (composition)

#### `bimap` method

```hs
bimap :: Bifunctor f => f a c ~> (a -> b, c -> d) -> f b d
```

A value which has a Bifunctor must provide a `bimap` method. The `bimap`
method takes two arguments:

    c.bimap(f, g)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `bimap` is unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `g` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `g` is not a function, the behaviour of `bimap` is unspecified.
    2. `g` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `g`'s return value should be checked.

3. `bimap` must return a value of the same Bifunctor.

### Profunctor

A value that implements the Profunctor specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `p.promap(a => a, b => b)` is equivalent to `p` (identity)
2. `p.promap(a => f(g(a)), b => h(i(b)))` is equivalent to `p.promap(f, i).promap(g, h)` (composition)

#### `promap` method

```hs
promap :: Profunctor p => p b c ~> (a -> b, c -> d) -> p a d
```

A value which has a Profunctor must provide a `promap` method.

The `profunctor` method takes two arguments:

    c.promap(f, g)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `promap` is unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `g` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `g` is not a function, the behaviour of `promap` is unspecified.
    2. `g` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `g`'s return value should be checked.

3. `promap` must return a value of the same Profunctor

## Derivations

When creating data types which satisfy multiple algebras, authors may choose
to implement certain methods then derive the remaining methods. Derivations:

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`ap`][] and [`of`][]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.ap(this.of(f)); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`chain`][] and [`of`][]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.chain(a => this.of(f(a))); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`bimap`]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.bimap(a => a, f); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`promap`]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.promap(a => a, f); }
    ```

  - [`ap`][] may be derived from [`chain`][]:

    ```js
    function(m) { return m.chain(f => this.map(f)); }
    ```

  - [`reduce`][] may be derived as follows:

    ```js
    function(f, acc) {
      function Const(value) {
        this.value = value;
      }
      Const.of = function(_) {
        return new Const(acc);
      };
      Const.prototype.map = function(_) {
        return this;
      };
      Const.prototype.ap = function(b) {
        return new Const(f(b.value, this.value));
      };
      return this.traverse(x => new Const(x), Const.of).value;
    }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived as follows:

    ```js
    function(f) {
      function Id(value) {
        this.value = value;
      };
      Id.of = function(x) {
        return new Id(x);
      };
      Id.prototype.map = function(f) {
        return new Id(f(this.value));
      };
      Id.prototype.ap = function(b) {
        return new Id(this.value(b.value));
      };
      return this.traverse(x => Id.of(f(x)), Id.of).value;
    }
    ```

If a data type provides a method which *could* be derived, its behaviour must
be equivalent to that of the derivation (or derivations).

## Notes

1. If there's more than a single way to implement the methods and
   laws, the implementation should choose one and provide wrappers for
   other uses.
2. It's discouraged to overload the specified methods. It can easily
   result in broken and buggy behaviour.
3. It is recommended to throw an exception on unspecified behaviour.
4. An `Id` container which implements many of the methods is provided in
   `internal/id.js`.


[`ap`]: #ap-method
[`bimap`]: #bimap-method
[`chain`]: #chain-method
[`concat`]: #concat-method
[`empty`]: #empty-method
[`equals`]: #equals-method
[`extend`]: #extend-method
[`extract`]: #extract-method
[`map`]: #map-method
[`of`]: #of-method
[`promap`]: #promap-method
[`reduce`]: #reduce-method
[`sequence`]: #sequence-method

## Alternatives

There also exists [Static Land Specification](https://github.com/rpominov/static-land)
with the exactly same ideas as Fantasy Land but based on static methods instead of instance methods.

Commit message:

have traverse take a type representative rather than an "of" function

README.md, after:

# Fantasy Land Specification

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/fantasyland/fantasy-land.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/fantasyland/fantasy-land) [![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/fantasyland/fantasy-land](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/fantasyland/fantasy-land?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

(aka "Algebraic JavaScript Specification")

<img src="logo.png" width="200" height="200" />

This project specifies interoperability of common algebraic
structures:

* [Setoid](#setoid)
* [Semigroup](#semigroup)
* [Monoid](#monoid)
* [Functor](#functor)
* [Apply](#apply)
* [Applicative](#applicative)
* [Alt](#alt)
* [Plus](#plus)
* [Alternative](#alternative)
* [Foldable](#foldable)
* [Traversable](#traversable)
* [Chain](#chain)
* [ChainRec](#chainrec)
* [Monad](#monad)
* [Extend](#extend)
* [Comonad](#comonad)
* [Bifunctor](#bifunctor)
* [Profunctor](#profunctor)

<img src="figures/dependencies.png" width="888" height="347" />

## General

An algebra is a set of values, a set of operators that it is closed
under and some laws it must obey.

Each Fantasy Land algebra is a separate specification. An algebra may
have dependencies on other algebras which must be implemented.

## Terminology

1. "value" is any JavaScript value, including any which have the
   structures defined below.
2. "equivalent" is an appropriate definition of equivalence for the given value.
    The definition should ensure that the two values can be safely swapped out in a program that respects abstractions. For example:
    - Two lists are equivalent if they are equivalent at all indices.
    - Two plain old JavaScript objects, interpreted as dictionaries, are equivalent when they are equivalent for all keys.
    - Two promises are equivalent when they yield equivalent values.
    - Two functions are equivalent if they yield equivalent outputs for equivalent inputs.

## Prefixed method names

In order for a data type to be compatible with Fantasy Land, its values must
have certain properties. These properties are all prefixed by `fantasy-land/`.
For example:

```js
//  MyType#fantasy-land/map :: MyType a ~> (a -> b) -> MyType b
MyType.prototype['fantasy-land/map'] = ...
```

Further in this document unprefixed names are used just to reduce noise.

For convenience you can use `fantasy-land` package:

```js
var fl = require('fantasy-land')

// ...

MyType.prototype[fl.map] = ...

// ...

var foo = bar[fl.map](x => x + 1)
```

## Type representatives

Certain behaviours are defined from the perspective of a member of a type.
Other behaviours do not require a member. Thus certain algebras require a
type to provide a value-level representative (with certain properties). The
Identity type, for example, could provide `Id` as its type representative:
`Id :: TypeRep Identity`.

If a type provides a type representative, each member of the type must have
a `constructor` property which is a reference to the type representative.

## Algebras

### Setoid

1. `a.equals(a) === true` (reflexivity)
2. `a.equals(b) === b.equals(a)` (symmetry)
3. If `a.equals(b)` and `b.equals(c)`, then `a.equals(c)` (transitivity)

#### `equals` method

```hs
equals :: Setoid a => a ~> a -> Boolean
```

A value which has a Setoid must provide an `equals` method. The
`equals` method takes one argument:

    a.equals(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Setoid

    1. If `b` is not the same Setoid, behaviour of `equals` is
       unspecified (returning `false` is recommended).

2. `equals` must return a boolean (`true` or `false`).

### Semigroup

1. `a.concat(b).concat(c)` is equivalent to `a.concat(b.concat(c))` (associativity)

#### `concat` method

```hs
concat :: Semigroup a => a ~> a -> a
```

A value which has a Semigroup must provide a `concat` method. The
`concat` method takes one argument:

    s.concat(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Semigroup

    1. If `b` is not the same semigroup, behaviour of `concat` is
       unspecified.

2. `concat` must return a value of the same Semigroup.

### Monoid

A value that implements the Monoid specification must also implement
the [Semigroup](#semigroup) specification.

1. `m.concat(M.empty())` is equivalent to `m` (right identity)
2. `M.empty().concat(m)` is equivalent to `m` (left identity)

#### `empty` method

```hs
empty :: Monoid m => () -> m
```

A value which has a Monoid must provide an `empty` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives):

    M.empty()

Given a value `m`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    m.constructor.empty()

1. `empty` must return a value of the same Monoid

### Functor

1. `u.map(a => a)` is equivalent to `u` (identity)
2. `u.map(x => f(g(x)))` is equivalent to `u.map(g).map(f)` (composition)

#### `map` method

```hs
map :: Functor f => f a ~> (a -> b) -> f b
```

A value which has a Functor must provide a `map` method. The `map`
method takes one argument:

    u.map(f)

1. `f` must be a function,

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `map` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `map` must return a value of the same Functor

### Apply

A value that implements the Apply specification must also
implement the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `v.ap(u.ap(a.map(f => g => x => f(g(x)))))` is equivalent to `v.ap(u).ap(a)` (composition)

#### `ap` method

```hs
ap :: Apply f => f a ~> f (a -> b) -> f b
```

A value which has an Apply must provide an `ap` method. The `ap`
method takes one argument:

    a.ap(b)

1. `b` must be an Apply of a function,

    1. If `b` does not represent a function, the behaviour of `ap` is
       unspecified.

2. `a` must be an Apply of any value

3. `ap` must apply the function in Apply `b` to the value in
   Apply `a`

   1. No parts of return value of that function should be checked.

### Applicative

A value that implements the Applicative specification must also
implement the [Apply](#apply) specification.

1. `v.ap(A.of(x => x))` is equivalent to `v` (identity)
2. `A.of(x).ap(A.of(f))` is equivalent to `A.of(f(x))` (homomorphism)
3. `A.of(y).ap(u)` is equivalent to `u.ap(A.of(f => f(y)))` (interchange)

#### `of` method

```hs
of :: Applicative f => a -> f a
```

A value which has an Applicative must provide an `of` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives). The `of` function takes
one argument:

    F.of(a)

Given a value `f`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    f.constructor.of(a)

1. `of` must provide a value of the same Applicative

    1. No parts of `a` should be checked

### Alt

A value that implements the Alt specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `a.alt(b).alt(c)` is equivalent to `a.alt(b.alt(c))` (associativity)
2. `a.alt(b).map(f)` is equivalent to `a.map(f).alt(b.map(f))` (distributivity)

#### `alt` method

```hs
alt :: Alt f => f a ~> f a -> f a
```

A value which has a Alt must provide a `alt` method. The
`alt` method takes one argument:

    a.alt(b)

1. `b` must be a value of the same Alt

    1. If `b` is not the same Alt, behaviour of `alt` is
       unspecified.
    2. `a` and `b` can contain any value of same type.
    3. No parts of `a`'s and `b`'s containing value should be checked.

2. `alt` must return a value of the same Alt.

### Plus

A value that implements the Plus specification must also implement
the [Alt](#alt) specification.

1. `x.alt(A.zero())` is equivalent to `x` (right identity)
2. `A.zero().alt(x)` is equivalent to `x` (left identity)
2. `A.zero().map(f)` is equivalent to `A.zero()` (annihilation)

#### `zero` method

```hs
zero :: Plus f => () -> f a
```

A value which has a Plus must provide an `zero` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives):

    A.zero()

Given a value `x`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    x.constructor.zero()

1. `zero` must return a value of the same Plus

### Alternative

A value that implements the Alternative specification must also implement
the [Applicative](#applicative) and [Plus](#plus) specifications.

1. `x.ap(f.alt(g))` is equivalent to `x.ap(f).alt(x.ap(g))` (distributivity)
1. `x.ap(A.zero())` is equivalent to `A.zero()` (annihilation)

### Foldable

1. `u.reduce` is equivalent to `u.reduce((acc, x) => acc.concat([x]), []).reduce`

#### `reduce` method

```hs
reduce :: Foldable f => f a ~> ((b, a) -> b, b) -> b
```

A value which has a Foldable must provide a `reduce` method. The `reduce`
method takes two arguments:

    u.reduce(f, x)

1. `f` must be a binary function

    1. if `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `reduce` is unspecified.
    2. The first argument to `f` must be the same type as `x`.
    3. `f` must return a value of the same type as `x`.
    4. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

1. `x` is the initial accumulator value for the reduction

    1. No parts of `x` should be checked.

### Traversable

A value that implements the Traversable specification must also
implement the [Functor](#functor) and [Foldable](#foldable) specifications.

1. `t(u.traverse(F, x => x))` is equivalent to `u.traverse(G, t)` for any
   `t` such that `t(a).map(f)` is equivalent to `t(a.map(f))` (naturality)

2. `u.traverse(F, F.of)` is equivalent to `F.of(u)` for any Applicative `F`
   (identity)

3. `u.traverse(Compose, x => new Compose(x))` is equivalent to
   `new Compose(u.traverse(F, x => x).map(x => x.traverse(G, x => x)))` for
   `Compose` defined below and any Applicatives `F` and `G` (composition)

```js
var Compose = function(c) {
  this.c = c;
};

Compose.of = function(x) {
  return new Compose(F.of(G.of(x)));
};

Compose.prototype.ap = function(f) {
  return new Compose(this.c.ap(f.c.map(u => y => y.ap(u))));
};

Compose.prototype.map = function(f) {
  return new Compose(this.c.map(y => y.map(f)));
};
```

#### `traverse` method

```hs
traverse :: Applicative f, Traversable t => t a ~> (TypeRep f, a -> f b) -> f (t b)
```

A value which has a Traversable must provide a `traverse` method. The `traverse`
method takes two arguments:

    u.traverse(A, f)

1. `A` must be the [type representative](#type-representatives) of an
   Applicative.

2. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `traverse` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of the type represented by `A`.

3. `traverse` must return a value of the type represented by `A`.

### Chain

A value that implements the Chain specification must also
implement the [Apply](#apply) specification.

1. `m.chain(f).chain(g)` is equivalent to `m.chain(x => f(x).chain(g))` (associativity)

#### `chain` method

```hs
chain :: Chain m => m a ~> (a -> m b) -> m b
```

A value which has a Chain must provide a `chain` method. The `chain`
method takes one argument:

    m.chain(f)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `chain` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of the same Chain

2. `chain` must return a value of the same Chain

### ChainRec

A value that implements the ChainRec specification must also implement the [Chain](#chain) specification.

1. `M.chainRec((next, done, v) => p(v) ? d(v).map(done) : n(v).map(next), i)`
   is equivalent to
   `(function step(v) { return p(v) ? d(v) : n(v).chain(step); }(i))` (equivalence)
2. Stack usage of `M.chainRec(f, i)` must be at most a constant multiple of the stack usage of `f` itself.

#### `chainRec` method

```hs
chainRec :: ChainRec m => ((a -> c, b -> c, a) -> m c, a) -> m b
```

A Type which has a ChainRec must provide a `chainRec` function on its
[type representative](#type-representatives). The `chainRec` function
takes two arguments:

    M.chainRec(f, i)

Given a value `m`, one can access its type representative via the
`constructor` property:

    m.constructor.chainRec(f, i)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value
    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `chainRec` is unspecified.
    2. `f` takes three arguments `next`, `done`, `value`
        1. `next` is a function which takes one argument of same type as `i` and can return any value
        2. `done` is a function which takes one argument and returns the same type as the return value of `next`
        3. `value` is some value of the same type as `i`
    3. `f` must return a value of the same ChainRec which contains a value returned from either `done` or `next`
2. `chainRec` must return a value of the same ChainRec which contains a value of same type as argument of `done`

### Monad

A value that implements the Monad specification must also implement
the [Applicative](#applicative) and [Chain](#chain) specifications.

1. `M.of(a).chain(f)` is equivalent to `f(a)` (left identity)
2. `m.chain(M.of)` is equivalent to `m` (right identity)

### Extend

A value that implements the Extend specification must also implement the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `w.extend(g).extend(f)` is equivalent to `w.extend(_w => f(_w.extend(g)))`

#### `extend` method

```hs
extend :: Extend w => w a ~> (w a -> b) -> w b
```

An Extend must provide an `extend` method. The `extend`
method takes one argument:

     w.extend(f)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `extend` is
       unspecified.
    2. `f` must return a value of type `v`, for some variable `v` contained in `w`.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `extend` must return a value of the same Extend.

### Comonad

A value that implements the Comonad specification must also implement the [Extend](#extend) specification.

1. `w.extend(_w => _w.extract())` is equivalent to `w`
2. `w.extend(f).extract()` is equivalent to `f(w)`

#### `extract` method

```hs
extract :: Comonad w => w a ~> () -> a
```

A value which has a Comonad must provide an `extract` method on itself.
The `extract` method takes no arguments:

    c.extract()

1. `extract` must return a value of type `v`, for some variable `v` contained in `w`.
    1. `v` must have the same type that `f` returns in `extend`.

### Bifunctor

A value that implements the Bifunctor specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `p.bimap(a => a, b => b)` is equivalent to `p` (identity)
2. `p.bimap(a => f(g(a)), b => h(i(b))` is equivalent to `p.bimap(g, i).bimap(f, h)` (composition)

#### `bimap` method

```hs
bimap :: Bifunctor f => f a c ~> (a -> b, c -> d) -> f b d
```

A value which has a Bifunctor must provide a `bimap` method. The `bimap`
method takes two arguments:

    c.bimap(f, g)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `bimap` is unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `g` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `g` is not a function, the behaviour of `bimap` is unspecified.
    2. `g` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `g`'s return value should be checked.

3. `bimap` must return a value of the same Bifunctor.

### Profunctor

A value that implements the Profunctor specification must also implement
the [Functor](#functor) specification.

1. `p.promap(a => a, b => b)` is equivalent to `p` (identity)
2. `p.promap(a => f(g(a)), b => h(i(b)))` is equivalent to `p.promap(f, i).promap(g, h)` (composition)

#### `promap` method

```hs
promap :: Profunctor p => p b c ~> (a -> b, c -> d) -> p a d
```

A value which has a Profunctor must provide a `promap` method.

The `profunctor` method takes two arguments:

    c.promap(f, g)

1. `f` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `f` is not a function, the behaviour of `promap` is unspecified.
    2. `f` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `f`'s return value should be checked.

2. `g` must be a function which returns a value

    1. If `g` is not a function, the behaviour of `promap` is unspecified.
    2. `g` can return any value.
    3. No parts of `g`'s return value should be checked.

3. `promap` must return a value of the same Profunctor

## Derivations

When creating data types which satisfy multiple algebras, authors may choose
to implement certain methods then derive the remaining methods. Derivations:

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`ap`][] and [`of`][]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.ap(this.of(f)); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`chain`][] and [`of`][]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.chain(a => this.of(f(a))); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`bimap`]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.bimap(a => a, f); }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived from [`promap`]:

    ```js
    function(f) { return this.promap(a => a, f); }
    ```

  - [`ap`][] may be derived from [`chain`][]:

    ```js
    function(m) { return m.chain(f => this.map(f)); }
    ```

  - [`reduce`][] may be derived as follows:

    ```js
    function(f, acc) {
      function Const(value) {
        this.value = value;
      }
      Const.of = function(_) {
        return new Const(acc);
      };
      Const.prototype.map = function(_) {
        return this;
      };
      Const.prototype.ap = function(b) {
        return new Const(f(b.value, this.value));
      };
      return this.traverse(x => new Const(x), Const.of).value;
    }
    ```

  - [`map`][] may be derived as follows:

    ```js
    function(f) {
      function Id(value) {
        this.value = value;
      };
      Id.of = function(x) {
        return new Id(x);
      };
      Id.prototype.map = function(f) {
        return new Id(f(this.value));
      };
      Id.prototype.ap = function(b) {
        return new Id(this.value(b.value));
      };
      return this.traverse(x => Id.of(f(x)), Id.of).value;
    }
    ```

If a data type provides a method which *could* be derived, its behaviour must
be equivalent to that of the derivation (or derivations).

## Notes

1. If there's more than a single way to implement the methods and
   laws, the implementation should choose one and provide wrappers for
   other uses.
2. It's discouraged to overload the specified methods. It can easily
   result in broken and buggy behaviour.
3. It is recommended to throw an exception on unspecified behaviour.
4. An `Id` container which implements many of the methods is provided in
   `internal/id.js`.


[`ap`]: #ap-method
[`bimap`]: #bimap-method
[`chain`]: #chain-method
[`concat`]: #concat-method
[`empty`]: #empty-method
[`equals`]: #equals-method
[`extend`]: #extend-method
[`extract`]: #extract-method
[`map`]: #map-method
[`of`]: #of-method
[`promap`]: #promap-method
[`reduce`]: #reduce-method
[`sequence`]: #sequence-method

## Alternatives

There also exists [Static Land Specification](https://github.com/rpominov/static-land)
with the exactly same ideas as Fantasy Land but based on static methods instead of instance methods.
